
Alexandria Handaja 
Gentrification of Bali, Indonesia 


About Bali

Bali is the most well-known destination in the Indonesian archipelago. It is a province that is 153km wide, 112km high, and has a land area of 5,780 square km. Bali has a population of approximately 4.22 million, and its main ethnic groups are Balinese, Javanese, Madurese, and Baliaga. There are three main religious groups, the biggest being Balinese Hinduism, followed by Christianity, and Islam.  "Balinese culture, Balinese ancestral beliefs, and Hinduism, are one in everyday life in Bali," The Balinese culture is one of the most prevalent aspects of the province. 
Bali has been awarded by TripAdvisor as the most popular destination for 2021. Every year there are millions of tourists visiting Bali- with over six million foreigners visiting in 2019 alone. Amongst these visitors, a handful ultimately decides to live on the island long-term. 
Bali is known for its luxurious beach resorts, water sports activities like white water rafting, diving, snorkeling, etc., beautiful scenery, and incredible nightlife. 


Increase of foreigners in the population
During the pandemic, there were several viral threads on Twitter and TikTok videos of Westerners that decided to book a one-way trip to Bali, which ultimately ‘changed their lives for the better.’ In one instance, a woman moved to Bali and decided to start her own business and lived in a $400 treehouse. She then released a book that served as a guide to moving to Bali. She described Bali to be the most perfect solution to her mental health and spoke about the low cost of living and luxurious and hospitable lifestyle. Her thread was met with instant backlash in which she was called out for basically writing a guide on ways to gentrify the country. 
“so basically using the privilege of western education to become upper class in an asian country where most people can only clean such houses. yeah that doesn’t sound problematic at all.” 
“Don't glamorize Bali. Don't glamorize a place so poor that its citizens heavily rely on tourism, foreign investors & rich expats. Don't glamorize being "one with nature" on some spiritual healing bs in a country that murders Indigenous people because it wants their lands.”
“Yes, the foreigner brings income for us. But their action will risk the local who works to serve them as well. Can they have a little empathy?” said Balinese politician and designer Niluh Djelantik

While $400 might seem cheap to foreigners, you have to remember that the average minimum wage is only $150 a month. Not only that, but most foreigners in Bali refuse to learn or respect the culture of the country, forcing us to adapt to them instead. 

“White people may decide to move to Bali without having to learn Indonesian, and no one will treat them negatively. People of color who move to predominantly white areas are likely to be criticized.”

A Russian influencer Alina Fazleeva, and her husband, Andry, were deported from Indonesia after posting images of herself naked on Kayu Putih, an incredibly sacred tree. Despite apologizing, Bali’s governor stated, “far important to preserve the culture and respect the dignity of Bali than tolerate such behavior for tourist dollars.”


